---
layout: post
title: Auditory Processing Disorder
date: 2014-05-26
categories: me
---

For all my life I have had a disability called Central Auditory Processing
Disorder (CAPD). People with CAPD have great difficulty understanding what
others say, especially when in noisy environments such as cafeterias,
playgrounds, gyms, bars, and public sporting events.

With me, the disorder manifests itself in two different ways. In loud
environments, it's similar to having a conversation with someone on the other
side of a crowded indoor basketball court. Essentially, you can hear that
everyone talking, but it's almost impossible to pick out their voice from
everyone else.

In more quiet environments. a good analogy is the teacher in Charlie Brown; you
can "hear" perfectly that the person is talking, but cannot understand what they
are saying. Sometimes it even "sounds" similar to that "wah wah wah" effect in
the cartoon.

Despite this disadvantage, there are quite a few strategies someone with CAPD
learns to be able to succeed. We're typically good at reading lips and body
language. Within Academics, it's not uncommon to have stronger reading skills
compared to peers, as individuals with CAPD learn early to compensate.

Unlike people that are deaf or have hearing loss, CAPD is not caused by anything
wrong with the ear itself, but rather how the brain interprets signals from the
ear via the nervous system. 

There is no cure for CAPD, and people with it will face its unique challenges 
for the rest of their life. While the disorder is relatively mild compared to 
other chronic conditions, it does cause significant social irritation at times.

## Diagnosis

An Audiologist using specialized equipment is responsible for diagnosing the 
disorder. Testing is done in soundproof rooms which can resemble an enclosed 
vault or decompression chamber. The process can be lengthy as other issues such 
as hearing loss have to be ruled out.

For children, audiologists typically work with a team of psychologists and
behavioral specialists to rule out disorders like ADD/ADHD, Austism, and
language development disorders. These disorders are more common than general 
APDs, however they can also be a misdiagnosis. Children that don't understand 
what they hear can act in a way that's easily misinterpreted as inattentiveness 
or poor behavior by adults.
